---
title: Contraception
source: contraception.html
type: medical_documentation
format: converted_from_html
---

## Contraception

|  |
| --- |
| Gillian Graves, MD, FRCSC |
| Date of Revision: July 1, 2022 |
| Peer Review Date: July 1, 2019 |

CPhA strives to provide guidance for health-care professionals on the appropriate care of all individuals. However, we recognize that in this chapter, our content is based on clinical research studies of patients who may not reflect the identity of the individual patient presenting. Other resources exist that may be helpful in addressing patient needs, such as the World Professional Association for Transgender Health’s (WPATH) Standard of Care.

### Goals of Therapy

- Prevent pregnancy
- Individualize contraceptive method based on specific needs, lifestyle, age, parity and desire for future fertility

### Investigations

Prior to initiating contraceptive methods, certain baseline measures may be considered:

- Medical history including chronic medical conditions and current medications
- Pregnancy test
- Weight
- Blood pressure for patients considering combined hormonal contraceptives (CHCs)
- Bimanual examination and cervical inspection for patients considering intrauterine devices (IUDs), cervical cap or diaphragm
- Sexually transmitted infection (STI) screening for patients considering intrauterine devices

### Therapeutic Choices

Assess the patient’s contraceptive needs. Some factors that may affect the choice of contraceptive include smoking status, age, obesity, breastfeeding and risk of nonadherence. As well, chronic medical conditions (e.g., hypertension, migraine, osteoporosis, depression, endometriosis, acne, dyslipidemia) and the use of concurrent medications (e.g., enzyme-inducing medications) may influence contraceptive choice. Effective contraception and education reduce rates of maternal and child mortality. Individual contraceptive needs change over time. Preferred contraceptive methods for younger patients are reversible, affordable and have good safety profiles and low failure rates. Many options are available such as different route of delivery, dosage, regimens and generic products. The method chosen should not interfere with other physiologic processes, e.g., vaginal lubrication, spontaneity or pleasure. After inquiring about the patient's needs and concerns, present the contraceptive choices along with appropriate counselling.

### Nonpharmacologic Choices

Nonhormonal methods of contraception are discussed in Contraception: Natural Family Planning and Barrier Methods

### Pharmacologic Choices

Hormonal contraceptive options are presented in [Table 5](#c0073n00480).

### Combined Estrogen- and Progestin-Containing Contraceptives

### Combined Oral Contraceptives

Combined oral (estrogen- and progestin-containing) contraceptives (COCs) as well as male condoms (for STI protection) are the 2 most common methods of contraception in Canada.​[[1]](#BlackAGuilbertECostescuDEtAl.SOGCCl-8D3F347D) COCs containing synthetic estrogen and progestogen (progestin) have been modified as a result of synthesis of more potent steroids. This has led to dose reduction, increased safety and reliability, and decreased adverse effects. Absolute contraindications of COCs are listed in [Table 1](#c0073n00119).

**Table 1:** Absolute Contraindications to Combined Oral Hormonal Contraception​[[2]](#c0073n00283)[[3]](#c0073n00285)

| Breast cancer or hormone-dependent cancer Cerebrovascular disease, history of cerebrovascular accident Complicated valvular heart disease Current or past history of venous thromboembolism or pulmonary embolism, known thrombogenic mutations, e.g., factor V Leiden; prothrombin mutation; protein S, protein C and antithrombin deficiencies; or other known coagulation-factor deficiency Diabetes with microvascular complications History of or current myocardial infarction or ischemic heart disease, vascular disease Uncontrolled hypertension Current pregnancy <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding Migraine with aura at any age Severe cirrhosis or liver tumor Smoker >35 y of age (≥15 cigarettes/day) |

Significant differences have not been shown between monophasic and triphasic COCs in regard to bleeding pattern or efficacy.​[[4]](#c0073n00287) Fixed-dose (monophasic) COCs are easier to manipulate than triphasic COCs. Low-dose COCs with 20–25 mcg ethinyl estradiol (EE) are effective contraceptive agents with pregnancy rates between 0.07 and 2.1 pregnancies per 100 patient-years of treatment.​[[5]](#c0073n00269) Ultra-low-dose COCs (e.g., Lolo) with 10 mcg EE are also available with a rate of 2.96 pregnancies per 100 patient-years of treatment for those 18–35 years of age.​[[6]](#CompendiumOfPharmaceuticalsAndSpeci-8D467FA2) They demonstrate reduced symptoms of bloating and breast tenderness​[[7]](#c0073n00290). However, low-dose COCs may be associated with more bleeding-pattern abnormalities.​[[8]](#c0073n00665)

Most COCs are available in 28-day cycles with 21 days of active medication and a 7-day hormone-free interval. Some 28-day regimens contain more than 21 days of active medication, e.g., Yaz, Lolo (see [Table 5](#c0073n00480)). For COCs with cycles >28 days, see [Extended or Continuous Use of Combined Hormonal Contraceptives](#c0073n00523).

The progestin component of COCs varies among different products; see [Table 2](#c0073n00122) for a list of COCs divided by progestin type. Products containing *third-generation progestins* (e.g., desogestrel, norgestimate) are less androgenic and may be useful in acne. While not approved by Health Canada for contraception, cyproterone **acetate** is a progestin with antiandrogenic activity that is used in combination with EE for the treatment of moderate to severe acne. However, most combined oral contraceptives (COCs) improve mild to moderate acne (see Acne).

Drospirenone is related to the aldosterone antagonist spironolactone and has both progestational and antiandrogenic activity.​[[9]](#c0073n00291) A Cochrane review of 5 trials shows drospirenone-containing COCs may benefit patients with premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), but there is limited evidence of benefit for milder disease or for greater than 3 cycles of use.​[[10]](#c0073n00603) Several observational studies concluded that drospirenone-containing COCs may confer a higher risk of venous thromboembolism than COCs containing other progestins (see [Risks Associated with Hormonal Contraception](#c0073n00036)).​[[11]](#c0073n00666)

[Table 2](#c0073n00122) lists the relative hormonal activity of various COC products.

**Table 2:** Hormonal Activity of Combined Oral Contraceptives

| Oral Contraceptive Product | Components | Relative Hormonal Activity | Estrogen | Progestin | Androgen |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Products with first-generation progestins |
| Lolo | ethinyl estradiol 10 mcg /norethindrone 1 mg | + | +++ | +++ |
| Brevicon 0.5/35 | ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg /norethindrone 0.5 mg | +++ | + | + |
| Synphasic (biphasic) | ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg /norethindrone 0.5/1 mg | +++ | ++ | ++ |
| Brevicon 1/35 , Select 1/35 | ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg /norethindrone 1 mg | +++ | +++ | +++ |
| Products with second-generation progestins |
| Alesse , Alysena , Esme | ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg /levonorgestrel 0.1 mg | + | + | ++ |
| Triquilar (triphasic) | ethinyl estradiol 30/40/30 mcg /levonorgestrel 0.05/0.075/0.125 mg | ++ | + | ++ |
| Min-Ovral, Portia, Ovima , Seasonale, Indayo | ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg /levonorgestrel 0.15 mg | ++ | ++ | +++ |
| Seasonique | ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg /levonorgestrel 0.15 mg /ethinyl estradiol 10 mcg | ++ | ++ | +++ |
| Products with third-generation progestins |
| Linessa (triphasic) | ethinyl estradiol 25 mcg /desogestrel 0.1/0.125/0.15 mg | ++ | +++ | + |
| Tricira Lo (triphasic) | ethinyl estradiol 25 mcg /norgestimate 0.18/0.215/0.25 mg | +++ | + | + |
| Marvelon , Apri, Freya , Reclipsen, Mirvala | ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg /desogestrel 0.15 mg | ++ | +++ | + |
| Products containing drospirenone (antiandrogenic) |
| Yaz, Yaz Plus | ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg /drospirenone 3 mg (Yaz Plus contains 0.45 mg levomefolate) | + | ++​ [a] | NA |
| Yasmin | ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg /drospirenone 3 mg | ++ | ++​ [a] | NA |

[a] Best estimate; data lacking.

Adapted with permission from Regier L, Downey S. Contraceptive, combination hormonal products—Prescription. In: *RxFiles. Drug comparison charts*. 11th ed., March 2017. Available from: www.rxfiles.ca. Subscription required.

Consideration must be given to potential drug interactions when selecting COCs for use. Oral contraceptives are metabolized in the liver by CYP3A4 P450 enzymes, and the efficacy is reduced in patients taking concomitant enzyme-inducing drugs. Clinically significant interactions occur with the use of antiepileptic medications (e.g., carbamazepine, eslicarbazepine, oxcarbazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin, primidone) and the antibiotics rifabutin and rifampicin, which are known to induce hepatic enzymes. It is advisable to recommend a contraceptive method that will not be affected by enzyme inducers (e.g., depot medroxyprogesterone acetate injectable, copper intrauterine device, levonorgestrel intrauterine system, barrier contraception) when taking a concomitant interacting medication. See Seizures and Epilepsy, Table 3 for antiepileptic enzyme-inducing medications. Alternatively, if a patient is taking an enzyme-inducing medication short term (≤2 months), an option is to take 1 COC pill daily (at least 30 mcg EE) for 3 or 4 cycles without a break (extended regimen or “tricycling”) followed by a hormone-free interval of 4 days.​[[12]](#DrugInteractionWithHormonalContrace-8ED123CD) For patients on enzyme-inducing medications long term, the use of 2 monophasic COC pills containing at least 50 mcg EE (e.g., 20 mcg and 30 mcg COCs) with a pill-free interval of 4 days can be used.​[[12]](#DrugInteractionWithHormonalContrace-8ED123CD) Note that both regimens are off-label and long-term studies have not been conducted. Patients taking rifabutin and rifampicin should not use these alternative regimens, and alternative contraception should be recommended.

### Contraceptive Vaginal Ring

An estrogen/progestin-releasing vaginal ring (NuvaRing) provides a more uniform contraceptive hormone concentration throughout the day,​[[13]](#c0073n00299) thus avoiding daily hormonal fluctuations. Since both hepatic first-pass and gastrointestinal metabolism are avoided, lower doses of hormones can be used. Cycle control with contraceptive vaginal ring use is comparable to that achieved with low EE COC use,​[[14]](#WeisbergEMerki-FeldGSMcGeechanKEtAl-558CB6E3) with irregular bleeding in 5.5% of cycles and withdrawal bleeding in 98.5% of cycles.​[[15]](#c0073n00026)​[[16]](#c0073n00027) The ring can be used without interfering with intercourse. Failure rate is 0.65 per 100 patient-years.​[[5]](#c0073n00269) A randomized controlled trial of 3 vaginal ring regimens (49, 91 or 364 days) compared with the usual 28-day cycle of ring use showed the frequency of breast tenderness, weight changes, headache and mood change were similar in all groups. Breast tenderness was more frequent with continuous use than cyclic use. Compared with 28-day regimens of ring use, a 49-day extended use regimen showed a mean decrease of 2% in bleeding/spotting days. Using it for 91 or 364 days increased the mean days of bleeding by 3.5% and 7.1% respectively; more patients discontinued therapy with the longer extended regimens.​[[17]](#c0073n00604)

### Transdermal Contraceptives

A transdermal estrogen/progestin patch (Evra) has similar contraceptive efficacy, cycle control and ovulation suppression to COCs,​[[18]](#c0073n00294)​[[19]](#c0073n00295) as well as better adherence (88% vs. 78% for COCs).​[[20]](#c0073n00296)​[[21]](#c0073n00297) The pregnancy rate is between 0.70 and 0.88 pregnancies per 100 patient-years of treatment.​[[1]](#BlackAGuilbertECostescuDEtAl.SOGCCl-8D3F347D) For individuals weighing 90 kg or more, this method may not be effective. Obesity may also affect follicular development through various mechanisms in patients taking OCs.​[[22]](#c0073n00298)​[[23]](#c0073n00608)

### Extended or Continuous Use of Combined Hormonal Contraceptives

Use of extended cycles (with planned hormone-free intervals) or continuous use of CHCs, such as pills, rings or patches, without a hormone-free interval may provide patients with relief from severe dysmenorrhea, heavy flow or socially undesirable flow.​[[24]](#c0073n00638) This can be achieved with products marketed for extended use (84 active tablets and 7 placebo or ultra-low estrogen tablets) or by the use of any pill, patch or ring in a continuous regimen (users take no break in between packages). Hormone-free intervals between cycles of any length should not exceed 7 days.

Compared with a 28-day cycle, extended cycles or continuous use of CHCs results in fewer bleeding days, decreased likelihood of side effects (e.g., pelvic pain, headache, bloating, swelling, tenderness) and improved symptoms of endometriosis and polycystic ovary syndrome.​[[24]](#c0073n00638) Extended cycles may also be associated with lower pregnancy rates.​[[25]](#Howard2018) One of the side effects or disadvantages of extended/continuous use is irregular, unscheduled bleeding. If an inadvertent pregnancy occurs (due to several missed pills or forgotten change of patch or ring), the patient may not realize they are pregnant without the amenorrhea that might otherwise alert a cyclic contraception user that they could be pregnant.

A 2018 large cohort study showed that low-dose continuous or extended cycle use of CHCs is associated with a small increased risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE) when compared with cyclic COC use, which is unlikely to be clinically significant.​[[26]](#Li2018)

### Progestin-Only Contraceptives

### Oral Progestin

Norethindrone inhibits cervical sperm penetration by thickening the cervical mucus. Regular and consistent use is necessary to maintain contraceptive efficacy since effect on cervical mucus decreases rapidly 22 hours after dosing. A backup method for the first month of use is recommended by the manufacturer, although some experts agree that 2 days of backup may be sufficient.​[[27]](#c0073n00667) If a dose is missed by more than 3 hours, a backup method is required. Norethindrone can be used in patients >35 years of age who smoke, cannot tolerate estrogen, have unwanted side effects with COCs, experience migraine headache with neurologic symptoms or are breastfeeding.

A drospirenone-containing pill became available on the Canadian market in May 2022. Drospirenone acts by inhibiting ovulation. In one trial, ovulation inhibition continued despite multiple delays in dosing, suggesting that it is more reliable than norethindone-only pills, which require stringent daily timing.​[[28]](#Duijkers2016) No head-to-head trials comparing drospirenone-only and norethindrone-only pills are available. However, unlike norethindrone, drospirenone exhibits antimineralocorticoid activity and may therefore result in hyperkalemia.​[[29]](#Palacios2019)

### Depot Medroxyprogesterone Acetate

Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) given by injection produces amenorrhea in the majority of patients, but some may experience irregular bleeding and side effects such as bloating, weight gain or loss, and mood swings. It may be a viable option for patients >35 years of age who smoke and for those who cannot tolerate or have contraindications to estrogen. When DMPA is discontinued, ovulation and regular menstrual periods may not resume for up to a year after the last injection. Failure rate is <0.32% per year.​[[30]](#CPSOnline.OttawaONCanadianPharmacis-B8673C2B)

A large cross-sectional study of patients (18–54 years of age) noted a 7.2% lower spinal bone mineral density (BMD) in users of DMPA than in non-users. The rate of loss was higher for those who started using DMPA before age 21 and in those using it for a longer duration (≥15 years). There is no strong evidence to support an association between DMPA and osteoporosis or fracture risk. DMPA therefore remains a recommended form of LARC.​[[31]](#c0073n00304)

### Etonogestrel Implant

The single rod etonogestrel (ENG) implant became available in Canada in 2020. Like other progestin-only LARCs, the implant works by continuously (over a period of 3 years) releasing a low-dose of progestin (etonogestrel), therefore inhibiting ovulation. It is highly efficacious (failure rate of 0.05%), and return to fertility is expected within a couple of weeks of implant removal. Since its use is associated with a decrease in bleeding days per month, it may be a suitable option in the management of dysmenorrhea, heavy menstrual bleeding and endometriosis associated pain. The etonogestrel implant is safe to be inserted immediately postpartum or postabortion.

Adverse effects include irregular bleeding and amenorrhea. Additionally, weight gain, acne, headache, breast tenderness and emotional lability have been reported. The rod is inserted subdermally at the inner side of the non-dominant upper arm. Complications during insertion or removal may also occur, and the rod should therefore be inserted by someone who has been adequately trained.

### Levonorgestrel Intrauterine System

After insertion of the levonorgestrel intrauterine system (LNG-IUS) into the uterus, a low dose is released continuously over a period of 5 years. It is associated with low systemic levels of levonorgestrel and is highly efficacious (≤0.2 pregnancy rate per year for levonorgestrel 52 mg over 5 years).​[[5]](#c0073n00269) A large prospective cohort study found that while contraceptive failure was very low with use of Copper IUD or LNG-IUS, the latter was associated with a lower risk of pregnancy, including ectopic pregnancy.​[[32]](#HeinemannK2015) Additionally, LNG-IUS can reduce menstrual blood loss, fibroid growth, dysmenorrhea and endometriosis pain. While using LNG-IUS, 20–30% of patients will stop having periods. In fibroid-related menorrhagia, menstrual bleeding was reduced by 90% with LNG-IUS compared with a 13% reduction with COCs.​[[33]](#c0073n00609) Normal menstruation restarts within 1–3 months of IUS removal. LNG-IUS may also reduce the risk of developing precancerous cells in the uterus. A 2017 meta-analysis estimated a one-third reduction in invasive cervical cancer in patients who had used an IUD.​[[34]](#Cortessis2017)

The safety of IUDs in patients under the age of 25 was studied in a 2017 systematic review.​[[35]](#Jatlaoui2017) The risk of expulsion, particularly for Cu-IUD, was higher in younger patients compared with older ones. Replacement contraception must be provided if this occurs to prevent unintended pregnancy. Rates of perforation, pregnancy, infection and removals due to bleeding were found to be similar in younger and older patients.​[[35]](#Jatlaoui2017)

Intrauterine systems of birth control require a clinician visit for initiation and discontinuation. Although it is not indicated, misoprostol (a prostaglandin E₁ analogue) has been widely used for cervical ripening to aid in the insertion of IUDs. However, a systematic review concluded that the routine use of misoprostol is not necessary and the rate of successful insertion of an IUD is high regardless of nulliparous status or misoprostol use.​[[36]](#refitem-1222140-8D532047) In nulliparous patients, pain at tenaculum placement is reduced with 1% lidocaine paracervical block compared to placebo.​[[37]](#Lopez2015)

The most common adverse effect is occasional bleeding or spotting for the first 3 months after insertion. Treatment for LNG-IUS–related spotting with NSAIDs (e.g., naproxen 500 mg BID for the first 5–7 days of each 4‑week period), tranexamic acid (500 mg BID or TID for the first 5–7 days of each 4‑week period) or transdermal estrogen (0.1 mg continuously) has demonstrated mixed results.​[[38]](#c0073n00668)​[[39]](#c0073n00669) Provide reassurance to patients for unscheduled bleeding but offer alternative contraception if they are dissatisfied with the bleeding pattern after 3–6 months of use.

A very small retrospective study of 30 adolescents with congenital cardiac anomalies or major cardiovascular conditions found good efficacy and low complication rates with long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARCs), most of which were LNG-IUS.​[[40]](#Oelschlager2014)

Although an initial randomized trial evaluated the efficacy of the LNG-IUS for 5 years, subsequent studies have shown that it can effectively prevent pregnancy for 6–8 years postinsertion with a similar adverse effect profile.​[[41]](#Westhoff2020)​[[42]](#Creinin2022) The U.S. FDA approved the use of LNG-IUS for 7 years.​[[43]](#FDAMirena)

### Risks Associated with Hormonal Contraception

Hormonal contraceptive use may confer an increased risk of certain conditions (e.g., MI, stroke, breast cancer). However, when used as a contraceptive method, the benefits of HCs may outweigh the risks, since pregnancy by itself is associated with significant rates of mortality and morbidity. For example, COC use is associated with a 1.5–3‑fold increased risk of VTE, while pregnancy is associated with a 6‑fold increase. Individualize HC selection based on history and considering noncontraceptive benefits, and control the individual's risk factors for disease such as obesity, smoking and hypertension. See [Table 3](#RisksCHC) for a summary of risks associated with HC.

**Table 3:** Risks Associated with Hormonal Contraceptives

| Risk | Evidence | Risk Management |
| Breast cancer | Evidence is conflicting Relative risk observed in a 2017 cohort study was estimated to be 1.20 (CI 1.14–1.26). The overall risk in patients taking HCs remains very low: 13 per 100 000 patient-years​ [44] Risk is lower in those <35 y: 1 in 50 000 patient-years (a 20-year-old has a 0.1% chance of developing breast cancer in the next 10 y)​ [44] Risk decreases with elapsed time since last use and is no longer apparent after 10 y of past use​ [45] Data regarding different types of hormonal preparation and risk of breast cancer are inconsistent​ [45] ​ [44] Moderate- and high-dose estrogen preparations as well as some triphasic formulas may be associated with increased risk compared to other products​ [45] LNG-IUS users may also confer a small, increased risk​ [44] | HCs are contraindicated in patients with current or past breast cancer. There is no evidence that HCs increase risk of breast cancer in those who have a family history of breast cancer or who are carriers of BRCA gene mutations.​ [46] ​ [47] CHCs are associated with a significant reduction in ovarian cancer risk (40–50% risk reduction), both in individuals who are carriers of the BRCA1/2 mutations and in the general population of patients.​ [48] |
| Cardiovascular risk |
| Ischemic stroke | Estimated relative risk 1.7 (95% CI 1.5–1.9)​ [49] Absolute risk is low (19 in 100 000 patient-years),​ [50] especially in the absence of CV risk factors Risk increased with higher doses of EE but does not vary according to the type or generation of progestin​ [49] ​ [50] Individuals who smoke and/or have migraine with aura are at increased risk | Consider alternative contraceptive methods for patients who suffer from migraines with focal neurologic signs, smoke cigarettes or are hypertensive. |
| MI | Estimated relative risk 1.6 (95% CI 1.2–2.1)​ [49] Absolute risk is low (7 in 100 000 patient-years),​ [50] especially in the absence of CV risk factors​ [51] ​ [52] No difference has been found between different generations or types of progestins​ [49] ​ [50] | Consider alternative contraceptive methods in individuals >35 y who have additional CV risk factors such as smoking, hypertension or diabetes.​ [46] |
| VTE | 1.5–3-fold increased risk among current COC users compared to non-users;​ [53] pregnancy is associated with a 6–10-fold increased risk​ [54] Risk increases with higher EE doses and the use of third-generation progestins as well as drospirenone or cyproterone. The risk may be higher than that associated with second-generation progestins (levonorgestrel, norethisterone) and norgestimate​ [55] Evidence regarding nonoral hormonal contraceptives is conflicting;​ [56] vaginal ring and transdermal patch but not LNG-IUS may also be associated with a small increased risk Inherited hypercoagulable states (e.g., factor V Leiden mutation, protein C or S deficiency)​ [46] and acquired conditions (e.g., immobility, trauma, surgery) are associated with an increased risk Individuals with obesity are at an increased risk compared to non-users​ [57] ​ [58] The risk of VTE with a drospirenone-only pill is unclear | Consider alternative contraceptive methods in individuals at higher risk of VTE (e.g., people with obesity). HCs are contraindicated in individuals with a history of VTE and hypercoagulable states. Current guidelines do not recommend preferential prescribing based on potential difference in VTE risk between formulations.​ [59] Broad-based screening for thrombophilias (e.g., protein C or S deficiency) is not appropriate unless there’s a strong family or personal history of VTE.​ [60] ​ [61] |
| Depression | Evidence is conflicting Studies conducted in the past 30 y examining the risk of depression with HC use found that it demonstrated no effect or a beneficial effect on mood A 2016 cohort study suggests that HC use is associated with an increased risk of subsequent first use of an antidepressant (2.2 per 100 person-years while that of non-users was 1.7 per 100 person-years); risk was highest among adolescents and users of nonoral HC​ [62] A 2017 cohort study suggests that all HC use in participants 15–33 y was associated with risk of first suicide attempt and suicide (relative risk 1.97 [CI 1.85–2.1] and 3.08 [CI 1.34–7.08] respectively);​ [63] risk was highest in adolescents and in the first 2 months after initiation of HCs and persisted even after discontinuation | Current eligibility criteria do not recommend against use of HCs in patients with mood disorders. Monitor for development of symptoms of depression, especially among adolescents. |

CHC
:   combined hormonal contraceptives

CI
:   confidence interval

COC
:   combined oral contraceptive

CV
:   cardiovascular

EE
:   ethinyl estradiol

HC
:   hormonal contraceptive

LNG-IUS
:   levonorgestrel intrauterine system

MI
:   myocardial infarction

VTE
:   venous thromboembolism

### Management of Adverse Effects of Hormonal Contraceptives

Adverse effects associated with HCs (e.g., nausea, headache, breakthrough bleeding) often diminish with continued use (3–6 months). Nevertheless, such adverse effects may significantly affect adherence to or continuation of a contraceptive method. [Table 4](#MgmtAEHC) summarizes the evidence regarding common patient-reported adverse effects and suggestions for management.

Proper assessment of the severity and duration of these adverse effects as well as ruling out other conditions are critical before attempting to switch to other HCs.

**Table 4:** Management of Adverse Effects of Hormonal Contraceptives

| Adverse Effect | Evidence | Management |
| Acne | DMPA, ENG–implant and progestin-only OC may be associated with acne. Patients with acne at baseline are likely to experience improvement within 6 months of COC use. | COCs are effective in treatment of acne. OCs with minimal androgenic effects and those containing the antiandrogens cyproterone acetate or drospirenone (see Table 2 ) are especially useful in patients with other signs of androgen excess (e.g., hirsutism). |
| Bleeding irregularities |  |  |
| Amenorrhea | LNG-IUS, DMPA, ENG-implant, continuous-use regimen COCs and continuous use of vaginal ring are associated with amenorrhea.​ [64] | Pregnancy should be ruled out if amenorrhea is of new onset.​ [59] Reassure patient that it is common. |
| Breakthrough bleeding | Progestin-only contraceptives and COCs with ≤20 mcg EE are associated with more breakthrough bleeding than other OC methods.​ [8] Continuous-use regimens are also associated with higher rates of unscheduled bleeding.​ [24] | Reassure patient that it is a common and self-resolving adverse effect that occurs within the first 3–6 months of treatment.​ [65] If irregular bleeding persists or has a new onset, other causes should be ruled out (e.g., STI, particularly chlamydia; pregnancy; drug interaction; uterine or cervical pathology).​ [59] COC-related breakthrough bleeding may be managed by increasing the dose to a maximum of 35 mcg EE or changing type of progestin in the COC.​ [65] ​ [66] If breakthrough bleeding occurs with continuous regimens, the pills can be stopped for 3–4 days/cycle, then restarted. Preliminary studies indicate that progestin-only–related breakthrough bleeding may be managed with supplemental estrogen or COCs, NSAIDs or tranexamic acid. The routine use of these medications should not be recommended until further large-scale trials have been performed.​ [66] ​ [67] |
| Breast tenderness | Transdermal HCs and continuous use of the vaginal contraceptive ring​ [17] may be associated with slightly higher rates of breast tenderness, while low-dose EE formulations​ [7] and continuous use of COCs​ [17] are associated with decreased rates of breast tenderness. Breast tenderness associated with COC use is generally self-limiting (18 months). | Consider changing to a COC if using a transdermal HC. |
| Headache | A systematic review found that 10% of patients experience a self-limiting (first cycle) headache with use of OCs that is not affected by type or dose of progestin.​ [68] | COCs are contraindicated in patients who suffer from migraine with aura because of the increased risk of stroke. Alternatively, nonestrogen contraceptive (i.e., progestin-only contraceptive or Cu-IUD) can be used. Reassure patient that headache is a self-resolving adverse effect, usually occurring within the first cycle. Extended-use regimens may reduce frequency and severity of headache.​ [24] |
| Hirsutism | DMPA may be associated with hirsutism. | Consider switching to a COC. OCs with minimal androgenic effects and those containing the antiandrogens cyproterone acetate or drospirenone (see Table 2 ) are especially useful in patients with other signs of androgen excess (e.g., acne). |
| Sexual dysfunction | COCs with ultra-low dose EE and progestin-only OCs may be associated with decreased sexual function.​ [69] Evidence regarding the effect of other HCs is inconsistent. | There is not enough evidence to recommend one HC over the other; however, if sexual dysfunction persists, consider switching to a different HC. |
| Weight gain | There is insufficient evidence to suggest an association between weight gain and HC use with the exception of DMPA and ENG-implant. | If weight gain is caused by DMPA or ENG-implant, switching to another HC may be appropriate. |

COC
:   combined oral contraceptive

Cu-IUD
:   copper intrauterine device

DMPA
:   depot medroxyprogesterone

EE
:   ethinyl estradiol

HC
:   hormonal contraceptive

LNG-IUS
:   levonorgestrel intrauterine system

OC
:   oral contraceptive

STI
:   sexually transmitted infection

### HIV and Contraception

Correct and consistent use of latex male condoms is the most effective way to reduce risk of acquisition and transmission of HIV. Regardless of formulation or dosage, spermicides containing nonoxynol-9 do not provide any protection against HIV.​[[70]](#c0073n00314)​[[71]](#c0073n00525)

Copper IUDs do not confer a greater risk of acquiring HIV than if no contraceptive method is used.​[[70]](#c0073n00314) Although there is concern about the theoretical risk of pelvic infection in patients with HIV/AIDS who use IUDs and about transmission to uninfected partners, evidence is lacking. Another concern is related to viral shedding and interactions with the progestin IUD, but evidence supporting such concern is weak.​[[72]](#prescott2014) People who engage in sexual intercourse with partners who may be HIV-infected should consistently and correctly use latex condoms regardless of other contraceptive methods used.

No studies of hormone use have directly addressed whether COC use enhances disease progression in patients with HIV/AIDS. For those at high risk of contracting HIV, evidence showing any increase in that risk for COC users compared to non-users is inconsistent. For patients infected with HIV, evidence is limited but there appears to be no correlation between COC use and changes in CD4 counts or RNA levels.​[[46]](#c0073n00559) Some antiretroviral drugs may interact with OCs (see [Table 5](#c0073n00480)). There is no strong evidence of association between the use of OCs or DMPA and HIV infection.​[[73]](#c0073n00670)

### Emergency Postcoital Contraception

See [Table 6](#c0073n00483) for more information on emergency contraceptive (EC) choices.

### Levonorgestrel

A single dose of levonorgestrel 1.5 mg used within 24 hours of unprotected intercourse prevents 95% of expected pregnancies.​[[74]](#c0073n00305) Efficacy is highest if treatment is provided within 24 hours; it can be taken up to 5 days after unprotected intercourse, though the effectiveness declines with increasing delay between unprotected intercourse and treatment initiation.​[[75]](#c0073n00306) Unprotected intercourse is defined as no contraceptive method used, condom breakage, more than 2 OC-pills missed any time during the cycle, 1 pill missed in the first week, more than 7-day pill-free interval, more than 13-week interval between DMPA injections or ejaculation on external genitalia.

The efficacy of levonorgestrel may be reduced with increased body weight or BMI.​[[76]](#c0073n00706)In March 2014, Health Canada issued an advisory to inform patients and health-care providers that levonorgestrel ECs are less effective in individuals weighing 75–80 kg and ineffective in those weighing more than 80 kg.​[[77]](#c0073n00707) In May 2014, the Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada (SOGC) responded to Health Canada's advisory and concluded that, until further evidence is available, patients who do not have access to or do not wish to use alternative EC methods (such as copper IUDs) should not be discouraged from using levonorgestrel-only EC, as it may still provide some benefit.​[[78]](#c0073n00711) In July 2014, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) completed an extensive review of levonorgestrel-only ECs and determined there are limited and inconclusive data on the effect of high body weight/high BMI on the contraceptive efficacy of levonorgestrel.​[[79]](#refitem-1192187-71817814) The EMA’s Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) recommends that ECs containing levonorgestrel continue to be used in patients of all weights, as the benefits outweigh the risks.​[[79]](#refitem-1192187-71817814)​[[80]](#refitem-1192188-7181CFB7) Until more evidence is available, it is reasonable to continue supporting the use of levonorgestrel for EC, irrespective of body weight.​[[78]](#c0073n00711)​[[79]](#refitem-1192187-71817814)

Levonorgestrel EC has a good safety record.​[[81]](#Jatlaoui) There was no diagnosis of DVT or pulmonary embolism within 45 days of the prescription in a large UK study of EC users.​[[82]](#c0073n00307) Side effects include nausea, vomiting, dizziness and fatigue. Emergency contraception has no effect on an established postimplantation pregnancy.

For patients taking a hepatic enzyme–inducing medication, it is preferable to take a nonhormonal EC, e.g., copper IUD. For those unable or unwilling to use the copper IUD, it is an option to take a total of 3 mg (2 × 1.5 mg tablets) levonorgestrel as a single dose as soon as possible after unprotected intercourse.​[[12]](#DrugInteractionWithHormonalContrace-8ED123CD)

Hormonal contraception can be started within 24 hours of levonorgestrel EC use. Backup contraception will be needed for the first 7 days of hormonal contraception.​[[1]](#BlackAGuilbertECostescuDEtAl.SOGCCl-8D3F347D)

### Ulipristal Acetate

Ulipristal **acetate** 30 mg was approved in Canada for prevention of pregnancy when taken within 120 hours (5 days) of unprotected intercourse or known or suspected contraceptive failure. Ulipristal is a selective progesterone receptor modulator that prevents progesterone from occupying its receptor by competitive inhibition. The primary mechanism of action for EC is believed to be inhibition or delay of ovulation.

A meta-analysis of 2 randomized controlled trials comparing the efficacy of ulipristal to levonorgestrel found that ulipristal was as effective as levonorgestrel when used within 72 hours after unprotected intercourse (1.4% vs. 2.2% pregnancy rate). One of the trials also showed that ulipristal may be more effective than levonorgestrel when used 72–120 hours after unprotected intercourse (0% vs. 2.8% pregnancy rate).​[[84]](#refitem-1202191-DD0972FB)

Data from the same meta-analysis showed the risk of pregnancy was greater in patients with a BMI ≥25 kg/m​2 for both ulipristal and levonorgestrel, with higher pregnancy rates observed for levonorgestrel compared with ulipristal in both patients who are overweight (2.5% vs. 1.1%) and those who are obese (5.8% vs. 2.6%).​[[1]](#BlackAGuilbertECostescuDEtAl.SOGCCl-8D3F347D)​[[76]](#c0073n00706) As with levonorgestrel, an extensive review by the EMA determined there are limited and inconclusive data on the effect of high body weight/high BMI on the contraceptive efficacy of ulipristal,​[[79]](#refitem-1192187-71817814) and the EMA’s CHMP recommends that ECs containing ulipristal continue to be used in patients of all weights, as the benefits outweigh the risks.​[[79]](#refitem-1192187-71817814)​[[80]](#refitem-1192188-7181CFB7)

Ulipristal is therefore a recommended option for EC up to 120 hours (5 days) after unprotected intercourse, and may be particularly favourable for individuals requiring contraception between 72 and 120 hours after intercourse or those with a BMI ≥25 kg/m​2.​[[1]](#BlackAGuilbertECostescuDEtAl.SOGCCl-8D3F347D)​[[76]](#c0073n00706)​[[84]](#refitem-1202191-DD0972FB) The most common adverse reactions reported in clinical trials were nausea, headache, dysmenorrhea, abdominal pain, fatigue and dizziness. While limited human data do not suggest a safety concern with ulipristal exposure during pregnancy, it is contraindicated in patients with known or suspected pregnancy.

Due to its high-affinity binding to the progesterone receptor, use of ulipristal may reduce the contraceptive action of progestogen-containing HC methods, and concomitant use is not recommended. Hormonal contraception can be initiated 5 days following use of ulipristal EC. Backup contraception is required for the first 5 days after taking ulipristal and for the first 7 days of hormonal contraception.​[[1]](#BlackAGuilbertECostescuDEtAl.SOGCCl-8D3F347D)

### Copper IUD

The **copper IUD** is the most effective method of EC available.​[[1]](#BlackAGuilbertECostescuDEtAl.SOGCCl-8D3F347D) Postcoital insertion of a copper IUD can be considered up to 7 days after unprotected intercourse. Prior to insertion, it is important to exclude pre-existing pregnancy. A meta-analysis demonstrated a failure rate of 0.1% from more than 8400 insertions of postcoital IUDs.​[[85]](#c0073n00309)​[[86]](#c0073n00671) Though the exact mechanism of action is unknown, copper is postulated to impair implantation.​[[87]](#c0073n00310) In addition to a high efficacy rate, the copper IUD is the only method to provide ongoing contraception to prevent future need for EC.​[[88]](#c0073n00648)

### Contraceptive Choices during Breastfeeding and Postpartum Period

After delivery, it is highly unpredictable when fertility will be restored in breastfeeding individuals. Within 6 weeks of delivery, there can be ovulation and pregnancy; these issues can be addressed at the postpartum visit. If coitus has resumed before the 6 week visit, exclude pregnancy before initiating a hormonal method of contraception.

### Contraceptive Choices in the Postpartum Period

Breastfeeding does not provide reliable contraceptive efficacy without a backup barrier method or alternative, as lactational amenorrhea is difficult to maintain (depends on consistent, exclusive breastfeeding, with no supplemental food or fluids given; additionally, menses must not have returned and the baby must be <6 months of age).

**Barrier methods** and **spermicide** can provide lubrication to the hypoestrogenic vagina but are not as effective for contraception as other methods.

With the exception of drospirenone-only oral contraceptive, **progestin-only** methods of contraception are recommended in postpartum individuals regardless of breastfeeding status.​[[89]](#c0073n00272) These methods are recommended during breastfeeding due to their lower associated risk of thromboembolism in the puerperium (i.e., the first 6 weeks postpartum) compared with COCs, and their neutral effect on milk supply and establishment of breastfeeding (see [Contraceptive Choices and Breastfeeding](#topic-1125-5FD23CB4)) and can be introduced immediately after delivery. Drospirenone is likely to be equally safe during breastfeeding but it is yet unclear whether it is associated with increased risk of VTE. It is therefore best avoided immediately after delivery, until more safety data are available. Norethindrone oral formulations must be taken every day at the same time, without missing a pill, to minimize spotting and maintain contraceptive efficacy. People who are breastfeeding or those with risk factors for VTE should avoid use of **COCs** in the first 6 weeks postpartum due to an increased risk of thrombosis.​[[59]](#Back2017) In those who are not breastfeeding, COCs may be started 3 weeks postpartum.​[[59]](#Back2017)

Although expulsion and perforation rates are higher for LNG-IUS when inserted immediately after delivery compared to 6 weeks postpartum, immediate insertion after delivery, either vaginally or via cesarean section may be considered.​[[90]](#refitem-12221100-9889528Fchapter7) An IUD can also be inserted immediately after a first- or second-trimester abortion. Immediate insertion appears to be safe and effective and provides convenience. As well, it provides assurance of contraception postpartum, ensures the patient is not currently pregnant, and decreases the risk of repeat unintended pregnancies and abortions.​[[91]](#c0073n00676)​[[92]](#c0073n00677)​[[93]](#c0073n00642)​[[94]](#c0073n00729)​[[95]](#ImmediatePostpartumLong-actingRever-5FF13344) Ensure good fundal placement; this can be difficult in the immediate postpartum state with the larger uterine cavity.

### Contraceptive Choices and Breastfeeding

Low-quality evidence suggests that progestin-only methods have no adverse breastfeeding outcomes or negative outcomes with regards to growth, health and development of infants.​[[96]](#c0073n00311)

In addition to the increased risk of thrombotic events associated with COC use <6 weeks postpartum, COCs may have a negative effect on milk supply. Results from low-quality studies are inconsistent with regards to the effect of COC use >6 weeks postpartum on breastfeeding duration and success.​[[97]](#TEPPERNK2016) No negative outcomes on infants were observed with later initiation of COCs (>6 weeks postpartum).​[[97]](#TEPPERNK2016)

If emergency contraception is desired during the postpartum period, a single dose of levonorgestrel 1.5 mg used within 24–72 hours of unprotected intercourse can be used with no restriction on breastfeeding.​[[98]](#c0073n00730)​[[99]](#c0073n00731) If ulipristal acetate is used for emergency contraception in the postpartum period, breastfeeding is not recommended for at least the first 24 hours (WHO recommends against breastfeeding for 1 week after taking ulipristal acetate).​[[46]](#c0073n00559)​[[93]](#c0073n00642) Breast milk should be expressed and discarded during that time.​[[93]](#c0073n00642)

### Therapeutic Tips

- Hormonal contraceptives help regulate cycles and decrease menstrual flow. This may help to control anemia in patients with heavy or irregular periods. In nonsmoking patients with no cardiovascular risk factors, COCs may be considered for contraception or control of dysfunctional uterine bleeding until menopause. For more information, see Dysmenorrhea.
- Noncontraceptive health benefits attributed to use of HCs include a decrease in the frequency of fibroids, endometriosis pain, benign breast disease, functional ovarian cysts, ectopic pregnancy, dysmenorrhea, pelvic inflammatory disease and perimenopausal symptoms. COC use is also associated with a reduced incidence of endometrial and ovarian cancers compared to non-users.​[[5]](#c0073n00269) For more information, see Endometriosis.
- Hormonal contraception does not protect against acquisition of STIs. Educate patients on use of male latex condoms.
- Long-acting reversible contraception (e.g., LNG-IUS, etonogestrel implant or copper IUD) is the preferred form of contraception in adolescents at high risk of contraception failure due to incorrect use.​[[100]](#c0073n00649)​[[101]](#c0073n00650) These devices are safe for use in nulliparous adolescents.​[[102]](#c0073n00672)
- The Zika virus can be transmitted through semen to sexual partner(s) and consequently to a fetus. The use of latex condoms or abstinence from sexual intercourse is recommended for patients infected with the Zika virus for 6 months prior to attempting conception or for the duration of pregnancy.​[[103]](#refitem-12221110-8E4844B7)
- Patients taking COCs do not need to use a backup method of birth control when taking antimicrobials that are not enzyme-inducers, e.g., penicillins, tetracyclines, macrolides, floroquinolones and imidazole antifungals. During periods of illness or if vomiting and diarrhea occur as a side effect from antibiotic treatment, additional precautions should be taken, as reduced absorption of the COC may result in contraceptive failure.​[[12]](#DrugInteractionWithHormonalContrace-8ED123CD)

### Drug Tables

**Table 5:** Hormonal Contraceptive Methods

| Drug/​Cost[a] | Adverse Effects | Drug Interactions | Contraindications | Comments |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

**Drug Class: Contraceptives, oral—combined estrogen(35 mcgethinyl estradiol) and progestin, monophasic**

| ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg /​ norethindrone 1 mg Brevicon 1/35 , Select 1/35 $10–20 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [c] ​ [104] Typical use: 9%. Perfect use: 0.3%. Lower-dose COCs are the method of choice for most young people, especially for teens, if combined with condoms; products with lower dose of ethinyl estradiol have increased safety, decreased side effects; condoms needed for STI protection. Patients with diarrhea or breakthrough bleeding may be at higher risk of contraceptive failure. |
| ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg /​ norethindrone 0.5 mg Brevicon 0.5/35 $10–20 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [c] ​ [104] Typical use: 9%. Perfect use: 0.3%. Lower-dose COCs are the method of choice for most young people, especially for teens, if combined with condoms; products with lower dose of ethinyl estradiol have increased safety, decreased side effects; condoms needed for STI protection. Patients with diarrhea or breakthrough bleeding may be at higher risk of contraceptive failure. |

**Drug Class: Contraceptives, oral—combined estrogen(30 mcgethinyl estradiol) and progestin, monophasic**

| ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg /​ desogestrel 0.15 mg Marvelon , Apri , Freya , Mirvala < $10 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [c] ​ [104] Typical use: 9%. Perfect use: 0.3%. Lower-dose COCs are the method of choice for most young people, especially for teens, if combined with condoms; products with lower dose of ethinyl estradiol have increased safety, decreased side effects; condoms needed for STI protection. Patients with diarrhea or breakthrough bleeding may be at higher risk of contraceptive failure. |
| ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg /​ drospirenone 3 mg Yasmin < $10 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. Risk of hyperkalemia in patients prone to increased K​ + , e.g., renal disease, concomitant ACEI , ARB , potassium-sparing diuretics, NSAID . Check K​ + after first cycle. May increase risk of VTE compared to LNG -containing OCs . | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [c] ​ [104] Typical use: 9%. Perfect use: 0.3%. Lower-dose COCs are the method of choice for most young people, especially for teens, if combined with condoms; products with lower dose of ethinyl estradiol have increased safety, decreased side effects; condoms needed for STI protection. Patients with diarrhea or breakthrough bleeding may be at higher risk of contraceptive failure. Also indicated for acne treatment. |
| ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg /​ levonorgestrel 0.15 mg, 1-month Min-Ovral , Portia , Ovima < $10 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [c] ​ [104] Typical use: 9%. Perfect use: 0.3%. Lower-dose COCs are the method of choice for most young people, especially for teens, if combined with condoms; products with lower dose of ethinyl estradiol have increased safety, decreased side effects; condoms needed for STI protection. Patients with diarrhea or breakthrough bleeding may be at higher risk of contraceptive failure. |
| ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg /​ levonorgestrel 0.15 mg, 3-month Seasonale , Seasonique , Indayo $45/3 months | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [c] ​ [104] Typical use: 9%. Perfect use: 0.3%. Lower-dose COCs are the method of choice for most young people, especially for teens, if combined with condoms; products with lower dose of ethinyl estradiol have increased safety, decreased side effects; condoms needed for STI protection. Patients with diarrhea or breakthrough bleeding may be at higher risk of contraceptive failure. Products are packaged for 3 months of continuous use, with 84 active tablets and 7 inert (Seasonale and Indayo) or ultra-low-dose (0.01 mg) ethinyl estradiol tablets (Seasonique). |
|  |  |  |  |

**Drug Class: Contraceptives, oral—combined estrogen(20 mcg ethinyl estradiol)and progestin, monophasic**

| ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg /​ drospirenone 3 mg Yaz $10–20 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. Risk of hyperkalemia in patients prone to increased K​ + , e.g., renal disease, concomitant ACEI , ARB , potassium-sparing diuretics, NSAID . Check K​ + after first cycle. May increase risk of VTE compared to LNG -containing OCs . | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [c] ​ [104] Typical use: 9%. Perfect use: 0.3%. Lower-dose COCs are the method of choice for most young people, especially for teens, if combined with condoms; products with lower dose of ethinyl estradiol have increased safety, decreased side effects; condoms needed for STI protection. Patients with diarrhea or breakthrough bleeding may be at higher risk of contraceptive failure. Also indicated for acne treatment. Packaged with active tablets × 24 days, inert tablets × 4 days. |
| ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg /​ drospirenone 3 mg /​ levomefolate calcium 0.451 mg Yaz Plus $10–20 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. Risk of hyperkalemia in patients prone to increased K​ + , e.g., renal disease, concomitant ACEI , ARB , potassium-sparing diuretics, NSAID . Check K​ + after first cycle. May increase risk of VTE compared to LNG -containing OCs . | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [c] ​ [104] Typical use: 9%. Perfect use: 0.3%. Lower-dose COCs are the method of choice for most young people, especially for teens, if combined with condoms; products with lower dose of ethinyl estradiol have increased safety, decreased side effects; condoms needed for STI protection. Patients with diarrhea or breakthrough bleeding may be at higher risk of contraceptive failure. Also indicated for acne treatment. First 24 tablets contain all 3 ingredients; last 4 tablets contain levomefolate calcium only. |
| ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg /​ levonorgestrel 0.1 mg Alesse , Alysena , Aviane < $10 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [c] ​ [104] Typical use: 9%. Perfect use: 0.3%. Lower-dose COCs are the method of choice for most young people, especially for teens, if combined with condoms; products with lower dose of ethinyl estradiol have increased safety, decreased side effects; condoms needed for STI protection. Patients with diarrhea or breakthrough bleeding may be at higher risk of contraceptive failure. Also indicated for acne treatment. |

**Drug Class: Contraceptives, oral—combined estrogen(10 mcgethinyl estradiol) and progestin, monophasic**

| ethinyl estradiol 10 mcg /​ norethindrone1 mg LOLO $10–20 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [c] ​ [104] Typical use: 9%. Perfect use: 0.3%. Lower-dose COCs are the method of choice for most young people, especially for teens, if combined with condoms; products with lower dose of ethinyl estradiol have increased safety, decreased side effects; condoms needed for STI protection. Patients with diarrhea or breakthrough bleeding may be at higher risk of contraceptive failure. LOLO contains 24 tablets containing ultra-low-dose ethinyl estradiol (10 mcg) and norethindrone acetate, 2 tablets of ultra-low-dose ethinyl estradiol and 2 inert tablets. |

**Drug Class: Contraceptives, oral—combined estrogen and progestin, triphasic**

| ethinyl estradiol 25 mcg /​ desogestrel 0.1 mg/0.125 mg/0.15 mg Linessa $10–20 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [c] ​ [104] Typical use: 9%. Perfect use: 0.3%. Lower-dose COCs are the method of choice for most young people, especially for teens, if combined with condoms; products with lower dose of ethinyl estradiol have increased safety, decreased side effects; condoms needed for STI protection. Patients with diarrhea or breakthrough bleeding may be at higher risk of contraceptive failure. Ethinyl estradiol dose stays constant; desogestrel dose increases Q7 days. |
| ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg /​ norethindrone 0.5 mg/1 mg/0.5 mg Synphasic $10–20 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [c] ​ [104] Typical use: 9%. Perfect use: 0.3%. Lower-dose COCs are the method of choice for most young people, especially for teens, if combined with condoms; products with lower dose of ethinyl estradiol have increased safety, decreased side effects; condoms needed for STI protection. Patients with diarrhea or breakthrough bleeding may be at higher risk of contraceptive failure. Ethinyl estradiol dose stays constant; norethindrone dose increases between days 8–16 of 21-day cycle. |
| ethinyl estradiol 25 mcg /​ norgestimate 0.18 mg/0.215 mg/0.25 mg Tricira Lo < $10 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [c] ​ [104] Typical use: 9%. Perfect use: 0.3%. Lower-dose COCs are the method of choice for most young people, especially for teens, if combined with condoms; products with lower dose of ethinyl estradiol have increased safety, decreased side effects; condoms needed for STI protection. Patients with diarrhea or breakthrough bleeding may be at higher risk of contraceptive failure. Ethinyl estradiol dose stays constant; norgestimate dose increases Q7 days. |
| ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg/40 mcg/30 mcg /​ levonorgestrel 0.05 mg/0.075 mg/0.125 mg Triquilar $10–20 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [c] ​ [104] Typical use: 9%. Perfect use: 0.3%. Lower-dose COCs are the method of choice for most young people, especially for teens, if combined with condoms; products with lower dose of ethinyl estradiol have increased safety, decreased side effects; condoms needed for STI protection. Patients with diarrhea or breakthrough bleeding may be at higher risk of contraceptive failure. Both ethinyl estradiol and levonorgestrel doses vary at days 7 and 12 of 21-day cycle. |

**Drug Class: Contraceptives, transdermal**

| ethinyl estradiol 600 mcg /​ norelgestromin 6 mg per weekly patch (releases approximately ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg/day, norelgestromin 200 mcg/day) Evra $20–30 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. Breast discomfort is more common than with COC in first 2 months of use; headache, skin reaction under patch, nausea, dysmenorrhea. 2%–3% detachment rate from skin. Studies assessing the risk of VTE in transdermal vs. COC users are conflicting. | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. Relative: body weight ≥90 kg (decreased efficacy). | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [1] Typical use: 0.88%. Perfect use: 0.7%. Condoms needed for STI protection. Apply once weekly × 3 wk (on same day each wk), followed by 1 patch-free wk. Apply to dry intact skin of buttock, abdomen, upper outer arm or upper torso. If off for <48 h, apply new patch. EC may be required if detachment occurred first wk of the cycle or last wk of the previous cycle. If off for ≥48 h, apply new patch and use backup method × 7 days . |

**Drug Class: Contraceptives, vaginal ring**

| ethinyl estradiol 15 mcg/day /​ etonorgestrel 120 mcg/day NuvaRing $10–20 | Major: thromboembolism (rare), stroke, retinal artery thrombosis, MI , benign liver tumor, cholelithiasis, hypertension. Watch for danger signals: ACHES— a bdominal pain, c hest pain, h eadaches, e ye problems, s evere leg pain. Advise patient to consult physician. Common: breakthrough bleeding/spotting, amenorrhea, nausea/vomiting, bloating, chloasma, breast tenderness, mood changes such as depression, headache. Common: vaginal discomfort, vaginitis, headache, leukorrhea, decreased libido, nausea, breast tenderness. | May increase cyclosporine levels and/or risk cyclosporine-induced renal and hepatic toxicity; may decrease lamotrigine levels. Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Monitor INR with concurrent oral anticoagulant use. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. Johns wort and topiramate may decrease ethinyl estradiol /progestin serum concentrations. May interfere with the correct placement and position of diaphragm or cervical cap—do not use these methods as backup. Concurrent use of vaginal tampons not recommended (ring can be expelled when removing tampon); can use tampons after vaginal ring is removed. | Absolute: history of MI or ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, complicated valvular heart disease, current or past history of VTE , known thrombogenic mutation, severe cirrhosis, liver tumor, breast cancer, diabetes with microvascular complications, migraines with aura, <6 wk postpartum if breastfeeding, smoker >35 y (≥15 cigarettes/day), hypertension (systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≥100 mm Hg ), known coagulation-factor deficiency.​ [46] Relative: estrogen hypersensitivity, migraine, gallbladder disease, high BMI /weight. Low-dose COCs are relatively contraindicated if BP ≥140/90. Relative: uterovaginal prolapse, vaginal stenosis (prevent retention of ring). | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [5] 0.65%. Can be self-inserted and removed; is worn vaginally continuously × 3 wk then removed × 1 wk. Systemic absorption occurs. If ring is left out of the vagina for >3 h, use backup method × 7 days . May not provide adequate contraception if left in place longer than 4 wk. Condoms needed for STI protection. May leave at room temperature for up to 4 months prior to insertion. Can be expelled from vagina while emptying bladder or bowel, especially during severe straining. |

**Drug Class: Contraceptives, progestin-only, oral**

| drospirenone 4 mg Slynd $10–20 | Breast tenderness, mood changes, weight gain, headache, menstrual irregularities, amenorrhea. Hyperglycemia and hyperkalemia have also been reported. | Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, rifampicin, St. John’s wort and topiramate may decrease progestin serum concentrations. Concurrent use of drospirenone with other drugs that increase potassium levels may increase risk of hyperkalemia. | Pregnancy, undiagnosed abnormal uterine bleeding, adrenal insufficiency, renal impairment, presence or history of cervical cancer or other progestin-sensitive cancers, hepatic impairment and liver tumors. | Failure rate: 0.72% Blisters contain 24 active tablets and 4 inactive tablets for hormone-free days. Should be taken at the same time daily. If >2 active pills are missed, a backup method should be used for 7 days. Preferred if contraindication to estrogen; condoms needed for STI protection. |
| norethindrone 0.35 mg Jencycla , Movisse $10–20 | Higher incidence of ectopic pregnancy compared to COC . Irregular bleeding (~12% of users in the first months, <3% in 18 months). | Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, rifampicin, St. John’s wort and topiramate may decrease progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: pregnancy, current breast cancer. Relative: active viral hepatitis, liver tumors. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [109] Typical use: 2.5%. Perfect use: 1.2%. Preferred in lactating individuals or if contraindication to estrogen; condoms needed for STI protection; packaged as active tablets × 28 days. Consistent timing of intake is required; if dose missed by >3 h, a backup method is required x 48 h. |

**Drug Class: Contraceptives, progestin-only, implant**

| etonogestrel implant Nexplanon $300 (lasts 3 y) | Breast tenderness, mood changes, weight gain, acne, headache, menstrual irregularities, amenorrhea. | Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, rifampicin, St. John’s wort and topiramate may decrease progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: pregnancy, current breast cancer. Relative: active viral hepatitis, liver tumors. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [109] 0.05%. Preferred in lactating individuals, postabortion or postpartum, or if contraindication to estrogen; condoms needed for STI prevention. Back-up method should be used for the first 7 days post-insertion, unless insertion occurred within first 5 days of menses or immediately postpartum or postabortion. Training of health-care providers in insertion and removal of the implant is important. |

**Drug Class: Contraceptives, progestin-only, injectable**

| medroxyprogesterone acetate Depo-Provera , generics $20–30 /3 months | Breast tenderness, insomnia or somnolence, fatigue, mood changes, e.g., depression or irritability, weight gain, menstrual irregularities, decreased libido, skin sensitivity reactions, hyperpyrexia, acne. Long term: decrease in BMD , delayed return of fertility. | Significant pharmacokinetic interaction with rifampin (advise backup barrier method during therapy). Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, rifampicin, St. John’s wort and topiramate may decrease progestin serum concentrations. | Absolute: pregnancy, unexplained vaginal or urinary tract bleeding, current diagnosis of breast cancer, known sensitivity to MPA or to the vehicle. Relative: severe cirrhosis, active viral hepatitis, benign hepatic adenoma. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [30] 0.32%. Inject 150 mg within first 5 days of onset of menses (to be effective immediately). If injected at any other time, backup contraception will be required for 7 days. Interval between injections must not exceed 13 wk. Excellent for patients who should avoid high estrogen doses, e.g., migraine sufferers. Consider other options in those with risk factors for osteoporosis. Condoms needed for STI protection. |

**Drug Class: Contraceptives, progestin-only, intrauterine system (IUS)**

| levonorgestrel intrauterine system 52 mg Mirena $365 (lasts 5 y) | Spotting for first 3 months after insertion; eventual amenorrhea in 20%–30% of patients. Expelled in 6% of patients. | The efficacy of LNG-IUS has not been studied in patients receiving enzyme-inducing drugs. Drug interactions are not likely clinically significant due to local action of LNG-IUS. | Pregnancy, current or recurrent PID , genital infection, postpartum endometritis, undiagnosed abnormal uterine bleeding, uterine or cervical malignancy, cervicitis, acute liver disease, hypersensitivity to components of system, hematologic malignancies, uterine anomaly. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [104] 0.2%. Condoms needed for STI protection. Remains in place for 5 y. If inserted within 7 days of onset of menses (to be effective immediately). If inserted at any other time, backup contraception will be required for 7 days. Although AHA guidelines suggest it is no longer mandatory to use endocarditis prophylaxis for IUD insertion, in individuals with complicated valvular heart disease, use clinical judgment based on the complexity of the heart lesion. May be used postabortion (no difference in safety or expulsion rate compared to copper IUD ).​ [46] Estimated average over 5 years of levonorgestrel release per day: 15 mcg/day |
| levonorgestrel intrauterine system 13.5 mg Kyleena $345 (lasts 5 y) | Prolonged and frequent bleeding and/or spotting for the first 3–6 months of therapy. Over time, infrequent bleeding and amenorrhea may occur. Expelled in 3.5% of patients. | The efficacy of LNG-IUS has not been studied in patients receiving enzyme-inducing drugs. Drug interactions are not likely clinically significant due to local action of LNG-IUS. | Pregnancy, current or recurrent PID , genital infection, postpartum endometritis, undiagnosed abnormal uterine bleeding, uterine or cervical malignancy, cervicitis, acute liver disease, hypersensitivity to components of system, hematologic malignancies, uterine anomaly. | Failure rate: ​ [b] ​ [104] 0.2%. Condoms needed for STI protection. Remains in place for 5 y. If inserted within 7 days of onset of menses (to be effective immediately). If inserted at any other time, backup contraception will be required for 7 days. Although AHA guidelines suggest it is no longer mandatory to use endocarditis prophylaxis for IUD insertion, in individuals with complicated valvular heart disease, use clinical judgment based on the complexity of the heart lesion. May be used postabortion (no difference in safety or expulsion rate compared to copper IUD ).​ [46] Estimated average over 5 years of levonorgestrel release per day: 9 mcg/day |

[[a]](#fnsrc_drufnad383484e2061) Approximate cost per 1 package for 1 month unless otherwise indicated; includes drug or contraceptive cost only. Mark-up is not included.

[b] Percentage of patients with unintended pregnancy within first year of use.

[c] General failure rate estimate for COC use. Refer to individual monographs.

**Abbreviations:**

ACEI
:   angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor

AHA
:   American Heart Association

ARB
:   angiotensin receptor blocker

BMD
:   bone mineral density

BMI
:   body mass index

BP
:   blood pressure

COC
:   combined oral contraceptive

EC
:   emergency contraception

EE
:   ethinyl estradiol

INR
:   international normalized ratio

IUD
:   intrauterine device

IUS
:   intrauterine system

LNG
:   levonorgestrel

LNG-IUS
:   levonorgestrel intrauterine system

MI
:   myocardial infarction

MPA
:   medroxyprogesterone acetate

NSAID
:   nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug

OC
:   oral contraceptive

PID
:   pelvic inflammatory disease

STI
:   sexually transmitted infection

VTE
:   venous thromboembolism

Legend:

$
:   < $10

$$
:   $10–20

$$$
:   $20–30

**Table 6:** Emergency Contraceptive Methods

| Drug/​Cost[a] | Dosage | Adverse Effects | Drug Interactions | Contraindications | Comments |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

**Drug Class: Contraceptives, emergency postcoital: intrauterine device (IUD)**

| copper-T IUD Flexi-T , Liberte , Mona Lisa $70–110 | Use within 7 days of unprotected intercourse as an emergency contraceptive. | Major: salpingitis, uterine perforation, cervical perforation, endometrial embedding, menorrhagia, pain, infection, ectopic pregnancy. | None. | Absolute: pregnancy, undiagnosed vaginal bleeding, stenosed cervix, copper allergy, current PID or STI , cervical or endometrial cancer, inability to place or retain device.​ [105] Relative: 2–28 days postpartum (to decrease risk of expulsion).​ [46] | Interferes with implantation after fertilization. Can be used as ongoing method of contraception. Pregnancy test is recommended if normal menstrual bleeding does not occur by day 21 following treatment. |

**Drug Class: Contraceptives, emergency postcoital: oral progestin**

| levonorgestrel Plan B , Backup Plan Onestep , other generics $15 | 1.5 mg PO or (2 × 0.75 mg tablets taken together) as soon as possible after unprotected intercourse (most effective if taken within 72 h). 0.75 mg PO Q12H × 2 doses is equally effective (second dose can be taken up to 24 h after first dose without significant change in pharmacokinetics​ [83] ). | Nausea, vomiting, dizziness, fatigue. | Carbamazepine, phenytoin, protease inhibitors, phenobarbital, St. John's wort, topiramate may decrease levonorgestrel serum concentrations. | Pregnancy. | Further evidence is required to support that levonorgestrel EC is less effective in patients with a high BMI . Recommend regardless of BMI .​ [78] ​ [79] |

**Drug Class: Contraceptives, emergency postcoital: oral selective progesterone receptor modulator**

| ulipristal ella $28 | 30 mg PO within 120 h of unprotected intercourse or known or suspected contraceptive failure. | Nausea, headache, dysmenorrhea, abdominal pain, fatigue, dizziness. | CYP3A4 inducers (e.g., rifampicin, phenytoin, phenobarbital, carbamazepine, St. John’s wort, barbiturates, carbamazepine, topiramate) may decrease serum concentrations and result in decreased efficacy. CYP3A4 inhibitors increase serum concentrations. Ulipristal binds to the progesterone receptor with high affinity and may interfere with the action of progestogen-containing medicinal products. Contraceptive action of combined hormonal contraceptives and progestogen-only contraception may be reduced. Concomitant use of ulipristal acetate and emergency contraception containing levonorgestrel is not recommended. | Known or suspected pregnancy. Hypersensitivity to ulipristal or any ingredients in formulation. | Not intended for use as a routine contraceptive. Concern with efficacy of ulipristal in patients with a high BMI ; until further evidence becomes available, recommend regardless of weight and BMI .​ [78] ​ [79] It is not recommended to use ulipristal if patient has been on an enzyme-inducing medication in the past 4 wk.​ [12] |

[[a]](#fnsrc_drufnad383484e5386) Cost of 1 dose; includes drug cost only.

**Abbreviations:**

BMI
:   body mass index

PID
:   pelvic inflammatory disease

STI
:   sexually transmitted infection

### Suggested Readings

[Black A, Guilbert E, Costescu D et al. SOGC clinical practice guidelines: Canadian contraception consensus (Part 1 of 4). *J Obstet Gynaecol Can* 2015;37(10):S1-28. Available from: https://www.jogc.com/article/S1701-2163(16)39373-2/abstract.](https://www.jogc.com/article/S1701-2163(16)39373-2/abstract)

[Black A, Guilbert E, Costescu D et al. SOGC clinical practice guidelines: Canadian contraception consensus (Part 2 of 4). *J Obstet Gynaecol Can* 2015;37(11):S1-39. Available from: https://www.jogc.com/article/S1701-2163(16)39378-1/abstract.](https://www.jogc.com/article/S1701-2163(16)39378-1/abstract)

[Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). U.S. Selected Practice Recommendations for Contraceptive Use, 2013: adapted from the World Health Organization selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2nd edition. *MMWR Recomm Rep* 2013;62(RR-05):1-60.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23784109)

[Faculty of Family Planning & Reproductive Health Care. FFPRHC Guidance (July 2004). Contraceptive choices for breastfeeding women. *J Fam Plann Reprod Health Care* 2004;30(3):181-9.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15222930)

[Stegeman BH, de Bastos M, Rosendaal FR et al. Different combined oral contraceptives and the risk of venous thrombosis: systematic review and network meta-analysis. *BMJ* 2013;347:f5298.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24030561)

### References

1. [Black A, Guilbert E, Costescu D et al. SOGC clinical practice guidelines: Canadian contraception consensus (Part 1 of 4). *J Obstet Gynaecol Can* 2015;37(10):S1-28. Available from: https://www.jogc.com/article/S1701-2163(16)39373-2/abstract. Accessed May 10, 2020.](https://www.jogc.com/article/S1701-2163(16)39373-2/abstract)
2. [Seibert C, Barbouche E, Fagan J et al. Prescribing oral contraceptives for women older than 35 years of age. *Ann Intern Med* 2003;138(1):54-64.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12513046)
3. [Boukes FS, Beijderwellen L, van der Does FE et al. [Summary of the practice guideline 'Hormonal contraception' (second revision) from the Dutch College of General Practitioners]. *Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd* 2004;148(26):1285-9. [Dutch].](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15279211)
4. [Van Vliet HA, Grimes DA, Helmerhorst FM et al. Biphasic versus monophasic oral contraceptives for contraception. *Cochrane Database Syst Rev* 2006;(3):CD002032.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16855983)
5. [Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Hormonal contraception: recent advances and controversies. *Fert Steril* 2004;82(Suppl 1):S26-32.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15363690)
6. CPS online. Ottawa (ON): Canadian Pharmacists Association; 2013. *Lolo* [product monograph]. Available from: cps.pharmacists.ca. Subscription required.
7. [Rosenberg MJ, Meyers A, Roy V. Efficacy, cycle control and side effects of low- and lower-dose oral contraceptives: a randomized trial of 20 micrograms and 35 micrograms estrogen preparations. *Contraception* 1999;60(6):321-9.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10715366)
8. [Gallo MF, Nanda K, Grimes DA et al. 20 µg versus >20 µg estrogen combined oral contraceptives for contraception. *Cochrane Database Syst Rev* 2013;(8):CD003989.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23904209)
9. [Keam SJ, Wagstaff AJ. Ethinylestradiol/drospirenone: a review of its use as an oral contraceptive. *Treat Endocrinol* 2003;2(1):49-70.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15871554)
10. [Lopez LM, Kaptein AA, Helmerhorst FM. Oral contraceptives containing drospirenone for premenstrual syndrome. *Cochrane Database Syst Rev* 2012;(2):CD006586.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19370644)
11. [Wu CQ, Grandi SM, Fillion KB et al. Drospirenone-containing oral contraceptive pills and the risk of venous and arterial thrombosis: a systematic review. *BJOG* 2013;120(7):801-10.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23530659)
12. [Faculty of Sexual & Reproductive Healthcare. *Clinical guidance: Drug Interactions with hormonal contraception*. London (GB): FSRH; January 2017. Available from: www.fsrh.org/documents/ceu-clinical-guidance-drug-interactions-with-hormonal/. Accessed January 12, 2017.](http://www.fsrh.org/documents/ceu-clinical-guidance-drug-interactions-with-hormonal/)
13. [Oddsson K, Leifels-Fischer B, de Melo NR et al. Efficacy and safety of a contraceptive vaginal ring (NuvaRing) compared with a combined oral contraceptive: a 1-year randomized trial. *Contraception* 2005;71(3):176-82.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15722066)
14. [Weisberg E, Merki-Feld GS, McGeechan K et al. Randomized comparison of bleeding patterns in women using a combined contraceptive vaginal ring or a low-dose combined oral contraceptive on a menstrually signaled regimen. *Contraception* 2015;91(2):121-6.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25459098)
15. [Roumen FJ, Apter D, Mulders TM et al. Efficacy, tolerability and acceptability of a novel contraceptive vaginal ring releasing etonogestrel and ethinyl oestradiol. *Hum Reprod* 2001;16(3):469-75.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11228213)
16. [Dieben TO, Roumen FJ, Apter D. Efficacy, cycle control, and user acceptability of a novel combined contraceptive vaginal ring. *Obstet Gynecol* 2002;100(3):585-93.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12220783)
17. [Miller L, Verhoeven CH, Hout J. Extended regimens of the contraceptive vaginal ring: a randomized trial. *Obstet Gynecol* 2005;106(3):473-82.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16135576)
18. [Sicat BL. Ortho Evra, a new contraceptive patch. *Pharmacotherapy* 2003;23(4):472-80.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12680477)
19. [Lopez LM, Grimes DA, Gallo MF et al. Skin patch and vaginal ring versus combined oral contraceptives for contraception. *Cochrane Database Syst Rev* 2013;(4):CD003552.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23633314)
20. [Audet MC, Moreau M, Koltun WD et al. Evaluation of contraceptive efficacy and cycle control of a transdermal contraceptive patch vs an oral contraceptive: a randomized controlled trial. *JAMA* 2001;285(18):2347-54.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11343482)
21. [Gomes MP, Deitcher SR. Risk of venous thromboembolic disease associated with hormonal contraceptives and hormone replacement therapy: a clinical review. *Arch Intern Med* 2004;164(18):1965-76.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15477430)
22. [Westhoff CL, Torgal AH, Mayeda ER et al. Ovarian suppression in normal-weight and obese women during oral contraceptive use: a randomized controlled trial. *Obstet Gynecol* 2010;116(2 Pt 1):275-83.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=20664386)
23. [Lopez LM, Grimes DA, Chen-Mok M et al. Hormonal contraceptives for contraception in overweight or obese women. *Cochrane Database Syst Rev* 2013;(4):CD008452.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23633356)
24. [Edelman A, Micks E, Gallo MF et al. Continuous or extended cycle vs. cyclic use of combined hormonal contraceptives for contraception. *Cochrane Database Syst Rev* 2014;(7):CD004695.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25072731)
25. [Howard B, Trussell J, Grubb E et al. Comparison of pregnancy rates of and charges from pregnancy complications in users of extended and cyclic combined oral contraceptive (COC) regimens: a brief report. *Contraception* 2014;89(5):396-9.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24457060)
26. [Li J, Panucci G, Moeny D et al. Association of Risk for Venous Thromboembolism With Use of Low-Dose Extended- and Continuous-Cycle Combined Oral Contraceptives: A Safety Study Using the Sentinel Distributed Database. *JAMA Intern Med* 2018;178(11):1482-1488.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30285041)
27. [Division of Reproductive Health, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). U.S. Selected Practice Recommendations for Contraceptive Use, 2013: adapted from the World Health Organization selected practice recommendations for contraceptive use, 2nd edition. *MMWR Recomm Rep* 2013;62(RR-05):1-60.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23784109)
28. [Duijkers IJM﻿, Heger-Mahn D﻿, Drouin D et al﻿. Maintenance of ovulation inhibition with a new progestogen-only pill containing drospirenone after scheduled 24-h delays in pill intake. ﻿ *Contraception* 2016;93(4):303-9.](Duijkers IJM%EF%BB%BF, Heger-Mahn D%EF%BB%BF, Drouin D et al%EF%BB%BF. Maintenance of ovulation inhibition with a new progestogen-only pill containing drospirenone after scheduled 24-h delays in pill intake. %EF%BB%BF%C2%A0Contraception 2016;93(4):303-9.https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26708301)
29. [Palacios S﻿, Colli E﻿, Regidor PA﻿. Multicenter, phase III trials on the contraceptive efficacy, tolerability and safety of a new drospirenone-only pill. ﻿ *Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand* 2019;98(12):1549-57.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31321765)
30. CPS online. Ottawa (ON): Canadian Pharmacists Association; 2016. *Depo-Provera* [product monograph].breast cancer cps.pharmacists.ca. Subscription required.
31. [Black A, Guilbert E, Costescu D et al. SOGC clinical practice guideline: Canadian contraception consensus (Part 3 of 4): Chapter 8–Progestin-Only Contraception. *J Obstet Gynaecol Can* 2016;38(3):279-300.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27106200)
32. [Heinemann K, Reed S, Moehner S et al. Comparative contraceptive effectiveness of levonorgestrel-releasing and copper intrauterine devices: the European Active Surveillance Study for Intrauterine Devices. *Contraception* 2015;91(4):280-3.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25601350)
33. [Sayed GH, Zakherah MS, El-Nashar SA et al. A randomized clinical trial of a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system and a low-dose combined oral contraceptive for fibroid-related menorrhagia. *Int J Gynaecol Obstet* 2011;112(2):126-30.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21092958)
34. [Cortessis VK, Barrett M, Brown Wade N. Intrauterine Device Use and Cervical Cancer Risk: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. *Obstet Gynecol* 2017;130(6):1226-1236.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29112647)
35. [Jatlaoui TC, Riley HEM, Curtis KM. The safety of intrauterine devices among young women: a systematic review. *Contraception*. 2017;95(1):17-39.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27771475)
36. [Matthews LR, O'Dwyer L, O'Neill E. Intrauterine device insertion failure after misoprostol administration: a systematic review. *Obstet Gynecol* 2016;128(5):1084-91.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27741184)
37. [Lopez LM, Bernholc A, Zeng Y et al. Interventions for pain with intrauterine device insertion. *Cochrane Database Syst Rev.* 2015;(7):CD007373.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26222246)
38. [Sordal T, Inki P, Draeby J et al. Management of initial bleeding or spotting after levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system placement: a randomized controlled trial. *Obstet Gynecol* 2013;121(5):934-41.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23635728)
39. [Madden T, Proehl S, Allsworth JE et al. Naproxen or estradiol for bleeding and spotting with the levonorgestrel intrauterine system: a randomized controlled trial. *Am J Obstet Gynecol* 2012;206(2):129.e1-8.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22055339)
40. [Amies Oelschlager AM, Micks EA, Debiec KE et al. Long acting reversible contraception in adolescents with cardiovascular conditions. *J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol* 2014;27(6):353-5](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25256877)
41. [Westhoff CL, Keder LM, Gangestad A et al. Six-year contraceptive efficacy and continued safety of a levonorgestrel 52 mg intrauterine system. *Contraception* 2020;101(3):159-61.](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31786203/)
42. [Creinin MD, Schreiber CA, Turok DK et al. Levonorgestrel 52 mg intrauterine system efficacy and safety through 8 years of use. *Am J Obstet Gynecol* 2022 May 12 [Epub ahead of print].](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35569516/)
43. [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. *MIRENA- levonorgestrel intrauterine device* [internet]. Available from: www.accessdata.fda.gov/spl/data/21ce3b07-0588-4ac3-915b-d1c238d756ea/21ce3b07-0588-4ac3-915b-d1c238d756ea.xml#ID\_​7816fb40-e147-443f-ab6b-7ead3b29380d. Accessed May 16, 2022.](https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/spl/data/21ce3b07-0588-4ac3-915b-d1c238d756ea/21ce3b07-0588-4ac3-915b-d1c238d756ea.xml#ID_7816fb40-e147-443f-ab6b-7ead3b29380d)
44. [Mørch LS, Skovlund CW, Hannaford PC et al.Contemporary Hormonal Contraception and the Risk of Breast Cancer. *N Engl J Med* 2017;377(23):2228-2239.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29211679)
45. [Beaber EF, Buist DS, Barlow WE et al. Recent oral contraceptive use by formulation and breast cancer risk among women 20 to 49 years of age. *Cancer Res* 2014;74(15):4078-89.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25085875)
46. [World Health Organization. *Medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use*. 5th ed. Geneva (CH): Department of Reproductive Health, WHO; 2015. Available from: www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/family\_​planning/MEC-5/en/.](http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/family_planning/MEC-5/en/)
47. [Cibula D, Zikan M, Dusek L et al. Oral contraceptives and risk of ovarian and breast cancers in BRCA mutation carriers: a meta-analysis. *Expert Rev Anticancer Ther* 2011;11(8):1197-207.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21916573)
48. [Waker M, Jacobson M, Sobel M. Management of ovarian cancer risk in women with BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants. *CMAJ* 2019;191(32):E886-E893.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31405835/)
49. [Roach RE, Helmerhorst FM, Lijfering WM et al. Combined oral contraceptives: the risk of myocardial infarction and ischemic stroke. *Cochrane Database Syst Rev* 2015;(8):CD011054.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26310586)
50. [Weill A, Dalichampt M, Raguideau F et al. Low dose oestrogen combined oral contraception and risk of pulmonary embolism, stroke, and myocardial infarction in five million French women: cohort study. *BMJ* 2016;353:i2002.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27164970)
51. [Acute myocardial infarction and combined oral contraceptives: results of an international multicentre case-control study. WHO Collaborative Study of Cardiovascular Disease and Steroid Hormone Contraception. *Lancet* 1997;349(9060):1202-9.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9130941)
52. [Petitti DB. Clinical practice. Combination estrogen-progestin oral contraceptives. *N Engl J Med* 2003;349(15):1443-50.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=14534338)
53. [Peragallo Urrutia R, Coeytaux RR, McBroom AJ et al. Risk of acute thromboembolic events with oral contraceptive use: a systematic review and meta-analysis. *Obstet Gyn* 2013;122(2 Pt 1):380-9.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23969809)
54. [Kujovich JL. Hormones and pregnancy: thromboembolic risks for women. *Br J Haematol* 2004;126(4):443-54.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15287937)
55. [Vinogradova Y, Coupland C, Hippisley-Cox J. Use of combined oral contraceptives and risk of venous thromboembolism: nested case-control studies using the QResearch and CPRD databases. *BMJ* 2015;350:h2135.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26013557)
56. [Tepper NK, Dragoman MV, Gaffield ME et al. Nonoral combined hormonal contraceptives and thromboembolism: a systematic review. *Contraception* 2017;95(2):130-139.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27771476)
57. [Middeldorp S. Oral contraceptives and the risk of venous thromboembolism. *Gend Med* 2005;2(Suppl A):S3-9.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16551555)
58. [Nightingale AL, Lawrenson RA, Simpson EL et al. The effects of age, body mass index, smoking and general health on the risk of venous thromboembolism in users of combined oral contraceptives. *Eur J Contracept Reprod Health Care* 2000;5(4):265-74.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11245554)
59. [Black A, Guilbert E, Costescu D et al. No. 329-Canadian Contraception Consensus part 4 of 4 chapter 9: combined hormonal contraception. *J Obstet Gynaecol Can* 2017;39(4):229-68.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28413042)
60. [Wu O, Robertson L, Twaddle S et al. Screening for thrombophilia in high-risk situations: systematic review and cost-effectiveness analysis. The Thrombosis: Risk and Economic Assessment of Thrombophilia Screening (TREATS) study. *Health Technol Assess* 2006;10(11):1-110.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16595080)
61. [Wu O, Robertson L, Twaddle S et al. Screening for thrombophilia in high-risk situations: a meta-analysis and cost-effectiveness analysis. *Br J Haematol* 2005;131(1):80-90.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=16173967)
62. [Skovlund CW, Mørch LS, Kessing LV et al. Association of hormonal contraception with depression. *JAMA Psychiatry* 2016;73(11):1154-62.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27680324)
63. [Skovlund CW, Mørch LS, Kessing LV et al. Association of Hormonal Contraception With Suicide Attempts and Suicides. *Am J Psychiatry* 2018;175(4):336-342.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29145752)
64. [Grossman Barr N. Managing adverse effects of hormonal contraceptives. *Am Fam Physician* 2010;82(12):1499-506.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21166370)
65. [Lumsden MA, Gebbie A, Holland C. Managing unscheduled bleeding in non-pregnant premenopausal women. *BMJ* 2013;346:f3251.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23737266)
66. [U.K. Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists. Faculty of Sexual & Reproductive Healthcare Clinical Guidance. *Management of unscheduled bleeding in women using hormonal contraception*. 2009. Available from: www.rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/guidelines/unscheduledbleeding23092009.pdf. Accessed January 18, 2016.](https://www.rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/guidelines/unscheduledbleeding23092009.pdf)
67. [Abdel-Aleem H, d'Arcangues C, Vogelsong KM et al. Treatment of vaginal bleeding irregularities induced by progestin only contraceptives. *Cochrane Database Syst Rev* 2013;(10):CD003449.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24146298)
68. [Loder EW, Buse DC, Golub JR. Headache as a side effect of combination estrogen-progestin oral contraceptives: a systematic review. *Am J Obstet Gynecol* 2005;193(3 Pt 1):636-49.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16150254)
69. [Sabatini R, Cagiano R. Comparison profiles of cycle control, side effects and sexual satisfaction of three hormonal contraceptives. *Contraception.* 2006;74(3):220-3.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16904415)
70. [Cates W. Review of non-hormonal contraception (condoms, intrauterine devices, nonoxynol-9 and combos) on HIV acquisition. *J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr* 2005;38(Suppl 1):S8-10.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15867633)
71. [Roddy RE, Zekeng L, Ryan KA et al. A controlled trial of nonoxynol-9 film to reduce male-to-female transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. *N Engl J Med* 1998;339(8):504-10.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=9709043)
72. [Prescott GM, Matthews CM. Long-acting reversible contraception: a review in special populations. *Pharmacotherapy.* 2014(1):46-59.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24130075)
73. [Polis CB, Curtis KM. Use of hormonal contraceptives and HIV acquisition in women: a systematic review of the epidemiological evidence. *Lancet Infect Dis* 2013;13(9):797-808.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23871397)
74. [von Hertzen H, Piaggio G, Ding J et al. Low dose mifepristone and two regimens of levonorgestrel for emergency contraception: a WHO multicenter randomised trial. *Lancet* 2002;360(9348):1803-10.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=12480356)
75. [Rodrigues I, Grou F, Joly J. Effectiveness of emergency contraceptive pills between 72 and 120 hours after unprotected sexual intercourse. *Am J Obstet Gynecol* 2001;184(4):531-7.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11262449)
76. [Glasier A, Cameron ST, Blithe D et al. Can we identify women at risk of pregnancy despite using emergency contraception? Data from randomized trials of ulipristal acetate and levonorgestrel. *Contraception* 2011;84(4):363-7.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21920190)
77. [Health Canada. *Emergency contraceptive pills to carry warnings for reduced effectiveness in women over a certain body weight*. Available from: healthycanadians.gc.ca/recall-alert-rappel-avis/hc-sc/2014/38701a-eng.php.](http://healthycanadians.gc.ca/recall-alert-rappel-avis/hc-sc/2014/38701a-eng.php)
78. [Black A, Guilbert E, Costescu D et al. SOGC clinical practice guidelines: Canadian Contraception Consensus Chapter 3 Emergency Contraception. *J Obstet Gynaecol Can* 2015;37(10):S20-S28](https://www.jogc.com/article/S1701-2163(16)39372-0/fulltext)
79. [European Medicines Agency. Assessment report. *For emergency contraceptive medicinal products containing levonorgestrel or ulipristal*. 2014; EMA/464144/2014. Available from: www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en\_​GB/document\_​library/EPAR\_​-\_​Assessment\_​Report\_​-\_​Variation/human/001027/WC500176357.pdf.](http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/EPAR_-_Assessment_Report_-_Variation/human/001027/WC500176357.pdf)
80. [European Medicines Agency. *Levonorgestrel and ulipristal remain suitable emergency contraceptives for all women, regardless of bodyweight*. 2014; EMA/440549/2014. Available from: www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en\_​GB/document\_​library/Press\_​release/2014/07/WC500170056.pdf.](http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Press_release/2014/07/WC500170056.pdf)
81. [Jatlaoui TC, Riley H, Curtis KM. Safety data for levonorgestrel, ulipristal acetate and Yuzpe regimens for emergency contraception. *Contraception* 2016;93(2):93-112.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26546020)
82. [Vasilakis C, Jick SS, Jick H. The risk of venous thromboembolism in users of postcoital contraceptive pills. *Contraception* 1999;59(2):79-83.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=10361621)
83. [Tremblay D, Gainer E, Ulmann A. The pharmacokinetics of 750 microg levonorgestrel following administration of one single dose or two doses at 12- or 24-h interval. *Contraception* 2001;64(6):327-31.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11834229)
84. [Glasier AF, Cameron ST, Fine PM et al. Ulipristal acetate versus levonorgestrel for emergency contraception: a randomised non-inferiority trial and meta-analysis. *Lancet* 2010;375(9714):555-62.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20116841)
85. Trussell J, Ellerston C. Efficacy of emergency contraception. *Fertil Control Rev* 1995;4:8-11.
86. [Cleland K, Zhu H, Goldstuck N et al. The efficacy of intrauterine devices for emergency contraception: a systematic review of 35 years of experience. *Hum Reprod* 2012;27(7):1994-2000.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22570193)
87. [Thomas MA. Postcoital contraception. *Clin Obstet Gynecol* 2001;44(1):101-5.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=11219237)
88. [Cheng L, Che Y, Gulmezoglu AM. Interventions for emergency contraception. *Cochrane Database Syst Rev* 2012;(8):CD001324.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22895920)
89. [Black A, Francoeur D, Rowe T et al. SOGC clinical practice guidelines: Canadian contraception consensus. *J Obstet Gynaecol Can* 2004;26(3):219-96.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=15016334)
90. [Black A, Guilbert E, Costescu D et al. SOGC clinical practice guideline: Canadian contraception consensus (Part 3 of 4): Chapter 7–Intrauterine contraception. *J Obstet Gynaecol Can* 2016;38(2):182-222. Available from: www.jogc.com/article/S1701-2163(15)00024-9/pdf.](http://www.jogc.com/article/S1701-2163(15)00024-9/pdf)
91. [Grimes DA, Lopez LM, Schulz KF et al. Immediate post-partum insertion of intrauterine devices. *Cochrane Database Syst Rev* 2010;(5):CD003036.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20464722)
92. [Chen BA, Reeves MF, Hayes JL et al. Postplacental or delayed insertion of the elevonorgestrel intrauterine device after vaginal delivery: a randomized controlled trial. *Obstet Gynecol* 2010;116(5):1079-87.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20966692)
93. [Curtis KM, Tepper NK, Jatlaoui TC et al. U.S. medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use, 2016. *MMWR Recomm Rep* 2016;65(3):1-103.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27467196)
94. [Goldstuck ND, Steyn PS. Intrauterine contraception after cesarean section and during lactation: a systematic review. *Int J Womens Health* 2013;5:811-8.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24348074)
95. [American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Committee on Obstetric Practice. Committee opinion no. 670: immediate postpartum long-acting reversible contraception. *Obstet Gynecol* 2016;128(2):e32-7.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27454734)
96. [Phillips SJ, Tepper NK, Kapp N et al. Progestogen-only contraceptive use among breastfeeding women: a systematic review. *Contraception* 2016;94(3):226-52.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26410174)
97. [Tepper NK, Phillips SJ, Kapp N et al. Combined hormonal contraceptive use among breastfeeding women: an updated systematic review. *Contraception* 2016;94(3):262-74.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26002804)
98. [Gainer E, Massai R, Lillo S et al. Levonorgestrel pharmacokinetics in plasma and milk of lactating women who take 1.5 mg for emergency contraception. *Hum Reprod* 2007;22(6):1578-84.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17337471)
99. [Polakow-Farkash S, Gilad O, Merlob P et al. Levonorgestrel used for emergency contraception during lactation-a prospective observational cohort study on maternal and infant safety. *J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med* 2013;26(3):219-21.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22928541)
100. [Winner B, Peipert JF, Zhao Q et al. Effectiveness of long-acting reversible contraception. *N Engl J Med* 2012;366(21):1998-2007.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22621627)
101. [Committee on Adolescent Health Care Long-Acting Reversible Contraception Working Group, The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Committee opinion no. 539: adolescents and long-acting reversible contraception: implants and intrauterine devices. *Obstet Gynecol* 2012;120(4):983-8.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22996129)
102. [Berenson AB, Tan A, Hirth JM et al. Complications and continuation of intrauterine device use among commercially insured teenagers. *Obstet Gynecol* 2013;121(5):951-8.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23635730)
103. [Fiorentino DG, Montero FJ. The Zika virus and pregnancy. *Curr Obstet Gynecol Rep* 2016;5(3):234-8. Available from: link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13669-016-0171-1.](http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13669-016-0171-1)
104. [Trussell J. Contraceptive efficacy. In: Hatcher RA, Trussel J, Nelson AL et al. *Contraceptive technology: twentieth revised edition*. New York (NY): Ardent Media; 2011. Available from: www.contraceptivetechnology.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/CTFailureTable.pdf. Accessed February 6, 2014.](http://www.contraceptivetechnology.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/CTFailureTable.pdf)
105. [Nelson AL. Contraindications to IUD and IUS use. *Contraception* 2007;75(6 Suppl):S76-81.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=17531621)
106. [Peterson HB, Xia Z, Hughes JM et al. The risk of pregnancy after tubal sterilization: findings from the U.S. Collaborative Review of Sterilization. *Am J Obstet Gynecol* 1996;174(4):1161-8.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=pubmed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=8623843)
107. [Dragoman M, Petrie K, Torgal A et al. Contraceptive vaginal ring effectiveness is maintained during 6 weeks of use: a prospective study of normal BMI and obese women. *Contraception* 2013;87(4):432-6.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23312933)
108. [Health Canada. Drug Product Database online query. Bayer Inc. *Kyleena* [product monograph]. Available from: health-products.canada.ca/dpd-bdpp/index-eng.jsp.](https://health-products.canada.ca/dpd-bdpp/index-eng.jsp)
109. CPS online. Ottawa (ON): Canadian Pharmacists Association; 2012. *Micronor* [product monograph]. Available from: cps.pharmacists.ca. Subscription required.